# How to be #1 in the IOI? A study on Rating Nations Participating in the International Informatics Olympiad

## Abstract
This paper investigates the reliability of using Elo, TrueSkill, and Top Coder rating methods in analyzing the performance of nations participating in the International Informatics Olympiad from 2011-2022. This investigation aims to utilize the ratings to assist nations in improving and achieving more medals in future IOI contests. Based on ratings for Whole Contests and each problem category, including but not limited to Graph Theory, Ad Hoc, and Data Structures, we prove and compare the reliability of the rating methods by measuring their predictive accuracies. Besides, by taking Egypt as a case study, we show how to extract useful information from rating changes over time to assist in improvement. In addition, we use standardization and percentiles in locating Egypt, or any nation, in each category among other nations to find which categories weaken the Whole-Contests ratings of Egypt. Thus, Egypt can focus on these categories for improvements. Moreover, we relate each specific range of Whole-Contests percentiles to medal achievements, showing that nations in each range have nearly the same number and types of medals, which means that a country needs to get to a higher specific range of percentiles to get more and better in type medals. Ultimately, we set recommendations for future work, encompassing a sensitive analysis of which category is easier to improve and the usage of a modified Elo version.
